## HW 4


**Due Friday, February 16**

**Exercises:** 3.5.1, (3.5.3), 3.6.1, (3.6.2), (4.1.1), (4.1.2), (4.1.3), 4.1.4, 4.2.1, (4.2.2), (4.2.3), 4.2.4, (4.2.5), 4.3.1, 4.3.3.

(To pass this assignment, submit well-written, complete, correct solutions to at least **four** exercises from among the non-parenthesized numbers above.)

-------------------------------------------------

### Sec 3.5. 

**3.5.1.** An $L$-theory $T$ is complete iff 
$\varphi \vee \psi \in T$ implies $\varphi \in T$ or $\psi \in T$.

---

(3.5.3) Find a fommla defining the set of prime numbers in the standard model of Peano arithmetic.

-------------------------------------------------

### Sec 3.6. 

**3.6.1.** Prove that thc set of $L$-sentences true in $\emptyset_L$ is neither consistent nor deductively closed.

---

(3.6.2) Determine the set of L-sentences true in $\emptyset_L$ precisely.

----

### Sec 4.1. 

(4.1.1) Verify that the definition of reduced product does not depend on the representatives chosen.

---


(4.1.2) Show that every structure is embeddable in each of its reduced
powers.

---


(4.1.3) Let $F$ be the Frechet filter on ℕ and $\mathcal{N}$
the standard model of peano arithmetic. Prove that $\mathcal{N}^{\mathbb{N}}/F$ contains no prime divisors, hence the
embedding from the previous exercise does not preserve prime divisors.

---


**4.1.4.** Prove that every reduced power of a structure $\mathcal{N}$ modulo a principal filter is isomorphic to a (direct) power of $\mathcal N$.


-------------------------------------------------


### Sec 4.2.

<!-- **4.2.1.** Prove the assertions about filters made on page 44 of the text. 

**( a )** The filters generated by a singleton
(or just containing a singleton) are precisely the principal ultrafilters.

**( b )** Nonprincipal ultrafilters are harder to come by, for the ultrafilters are precisely the maximal filters. 

**( c )** There is no constructive way of describing ultrafilters. But every (ultra) filter on a set $I$ is principal if and only if $I$ is finite.

---
 -->


(4.2.2) Prove the statement left to the reader in the proof of Theorem 4.2.1.


---


(4.2.3) Let $U$ be an ultrafilter containing the Fréchet filter on ℕ, and let $\mathcal N$ be the standard model of Peano arithmetic. Prove that $\mathcal{N}^{\mathbb{N}}/U$ contains elements with 
infinitely many prime divisors (cf. Exercise 4.1.3).


---


**4.2.4.** A **primitive positive formula** (or *pp-formula*) is a formula of the form $\exists \mathbf{x} \,\varphi$ where $\varphi$ is a finite
conjunction of atomic formulas.
Prove that if we restrict to pp-formulas, then Los' Theorem holds in 
arbitrary reduced products.


---



(4.2.5) Show that the ultrapowers of a structure $\mathcal N$ modulo a principal ultralilter are isomorphic to $\mathcal N$. [cf. 4.1.4 and 4.2.1.]

---


### Sec 4.3.

**4.3.1.** 
Let $I$ be a nonempty set. A subset $F$ of ($I$) is said to have the **finite intersection property** if $F \neq \emptyset$ and no intersection of finitely many members of $F$ is empty.
Show that a nonempty set of subsets of a nonempty set $I$ is contained in a filter on $I$ if and only if that subset has the finite intersection property.

---

(4.3.2) Prove that if a set $\Sigma$ of sentences axiomatizes a finitely axiomatizable class of structures, then this class is axiomatized aleady by a finite subset
of $\Sigma$.

---

**4.3.3**.
Show that a class $\mathbf{K}$ of structures is finitely axiomatizable if and only if $\mathbf{K}$ and its complement (within the class of all structures) are both axiomatizable.
