## HW 8

**Due Friday April 13**

**Exercises:** **8.1.1**, **8.2.2**, **8.3.1**, (8.3.5), (8.3.6), **8.4.1**, **8.4.3**, **8.4.4**, **8.4.5**, **8.5.1**, (8.5.2), **8.5.5**.

To pass this assignment, submit well-written, complete, correct solutions to at least **five** exercises from among the non-parenthesized numbers above.

-------------------------------------------------

**8.1.1.**
Lct $\varphi \in L$ deĥne a finite set $X$ in the $L$-structure $\mathcal M$. 
Show that in every $\mathcal N$ elementarily equivalent to $\mathcal M$, 
the set defined by $\varphi$ has the same power as $X$. Formulate and prove a converse of this.

---

**8.2.2.**
Given a structure $\mathcal M$ and an ultrafilter $U$ on a nonempty set $I$,
prove that the canonical embedding (from Exercise 4.1.2) of $\mathcal M$ in its ultrapower $\mathcal M^I/U$ is elementary.

---

**8.3.1.**
Let $\mathcal M$ be an $L$-structure. Prove that the following are equivalent
for any formula $\varphi \in L_n(M)$.  
(i) $\varphi(\mathcal M)$ is finite.  
(ii) $\varphi(\mathcal M) = \varphi(\mathcal N)$ for every $\mathcal N \succcurlyeq \mathcal M$.  
(iii) $\varphi(\mathcal M) \subseteq M^n$ for every $\mathcal N \succcurlyeq \mathcal M$.

---

(8.3.5)
Show by counterexample that the criterion 8.3.4 is not necessary
for being an elementary substructure.

---

(8.3.6)
Prove that, given an arbitrary subordering $\mathcal M = (M, <) \subseteq \rho$, this inclusion is elementary if and only if $\mathcal M \vDash \mathrm{DLO}_{--}$.

---

**8.4.1.**
Suppose $\mathcal M$ is an $L$-structure and $\varphi \in L_n (n > 0)$ 
is such that $\varphi(\mathcal M)$
is infinite. Then for every $\kappa \in \mathbf{Cn}$ with $\kappa \geq |L|$, there is an $L$-structure $\mathcal N \equiv \mathcal M$ of power
$\kappa$ and such that $|\varphi(\mathcal N)| = \kappa$.

---

**8.4.3.**
Verify that ultrapowers (along with isomorphic correction) provide us with another tool to construct elementary extensions.

---

**8.4.4**
Consider $\mathcal M$ and $\mathcal N$ as in Example (4) of §6.3 and the 
disjoint union of $\mathcal M$ and $\mathcal N$, regarded as an $L_{<}$-structure $\mathcal N'$.  Prove that $\mathcal M$ and $\mathcal N'$ are elementarily equivalent.

---

**8.4.5.**
Find an example of a theory $T$ and a model of $T_{\exists}$ that does not
contain a model of $T$ (this showing that we cannot improve on Exercise 6.2.6).

---

**8.5.1.**
Show that $\mathrm{DLO}_{-+}$, $\mathrm{DLO}_{+-}$, and $\mathrm{DLO}_{++}$ are complete theories.


---

(8.5.2)
Prove that $\mathrm{DLO}_{--}$ is in no uncountable power categorical.

---

**8.5.5.** Show that the theory of the structure $\mathcal M$ from Exercise 8.4.4 is
categorical in all uncountable powers.

---
