## HW 5


**Due Monday, February 26**

**Exercises:** (5.2.1), **5.2.2**, **5.3.2**, (5.3.3), **5.3.4**, (5.5.1), **5.5.3**, (5.6.1), **5.6.2**, **5.6.6**, (5.7.2), **5.7.3**, **5.7.4**

(To pass this assignment, submit well-written, complete, correct solutions to at least **four** exercises from among the non-parenthesized numbers above.)

-------------------------------------------------

### Section 5.2

(5.2.1) Prove that the class of finite cycıic groups is not axiomatizable.

---

**5.2.2.** Prove that the class of cyclic groups is not axiomatizable.

---

### Section 5.3

**5.3.2.** Find a finite system of axioms for the class of rings without zero-divisors. Do the same for the class of commutative rings without zero-divisors (such
rings are known **integral domains**).

---

(5.3.3) Define the characteristic of an arbitrary ring (as before) and show that, for rings without zero-divisors, this number is 0 or a prime.

---

The next exercise concerns *nilpotent* elements of a ring.

**Definition.** An non-zero element $r$ in a ring is called **nilpotent** if there exists $n \in \mathbb N$ such that $r^n = 0$.

**5.3.4.** Show that the class of all rings without nilpotent elements is finitely axiomatizable.

---

### Section 5.5

(5.5.1) Show that every dense linear ordering is infinite. What would happen if the nontriviality axiom, (5), were dropped?

---

**5.5.3.**
Prove that homomorphic images of linear orderings need not be partial orderings (in our sense). Show that, nevertheless, every homomorphic image of a given linear ordering $X$ which is itself a partial ordering is isomorphic to $X$.

---

### Section 5.6

(5.6.1) Prove---without using the Axiom of Choice (or any equivalent, like Zorn's Lemma)---that in a well-ordered boolean algebra, every filter can be extended
to an ultrafilter. (Note that this applies to any countable boolean algebra, in
particular to the Lindenbaum-Tarski algebras of countable languages (or theories).)

---

**5.6.2.** Prove the following

**Theorem 5.6.1.** (The Stone Representation Theorem)  
1. If $\mathcal B \models \mathrm{BA}$ then $S(\mathcal B)$ is a Stone space, the so-called Stone space of the boolean algebra $\mathcal B$.
2. If S is a Stone space, then the clopen subsets of $S$ form a boolean set algebra $\operatorname{B}(S)$.
3. Every booıean algebra $\mathcal B$ is isomorphįc to the boolean algebra $\operatorname{B}(\operatorname{S}(\mathcal B))$ via the map $a \mapsto \langle a\rangle$. Hence $\mathcal B$ is isomorphic to a subalgebra of the boolean algebra of all subsets of $\operatorname{S}(\mathcal B)$.
4. Every Stone space $S$ is homeomorphic to the Stone space $\operatorname{S}(\operatorname{B}(S))$ via the map $x \mapsto \{a \in \operatorname{B}(S) : x \in a\}$.

---

**5.6.6.**
Prove the aforementioned fact that the $L$-theories are (up to logical equivalence) the filters of the algebra $\mathcal{B}_L$, while its ultrafilters are the complete
$L$-theories (so the Stone space of $\mathcal{B}_L$ is $\mathrm{S}_L$).

---

### Section 5.7


(5.7.2) Derive the finiteness theorem from the compactness theorem.

---

**5.7.3.** Show that a complete $L$-theory is finitely axiomatizable if and only if it is isolated as a point in $\mathrm{S}_L$·

---

**5.7.4.** Derive from the previous exercise that $T_=^\infty$ is not finitely axiomatizable (a result we already know from Exercise 4.3.4).
