## Math 6000 HW 7

**Due Friday, March 23**  
Submissions will also be accepted Monday, April 2 (after spring break).

**Exercises:** (7.1.1), **7.2.1**, **7.3.2**, **7.4.1**, **7.4.2**, **7.5.1**, **7.5.2**, **7.5.3** 

To pass this assignment, submit well-written, complete, correct solutions to at least **four** exercises from among the non-parenthesized numbers above.

-------------------------------------------------

(7.1.1)
Verify that the positive diagram of a structure is logically equivalent to a subset of all its *unnested* atomic formulas.

---

**7.2.1.**
Define recursively a rank function $r$ from a finite partial ordering
$\mathcal A = (A, \prec)$ to $\mathbb N$ by setting $r (a) = 0$ for every $\prec$-minimal element $a$ in $A$, and
setting $r(b) = 1$ for every $\prec$-minimal element $b$ in 
$A \setminus \{a \in A : r(a) = 0\}$, and so forth.

Use this to extend $\prec$ to a linear order on $A$.

---

**7.3.2.**
Find the four isomorphism types of countable dense linear orderings 
(and justify your answer).

---

**7.4.1.**
Given orderings $\mathcal X$ and $\mathcal Y$, one defines their **sum** 
$\mathcal X + \mathcal Y$, to be **disjoint union** of $X$ and $Y$ equipped with the order extending the orders of $\mathcal X$ and $\mathcal Y$ defined by $x < y$ for all $x \in X$ and $y \in Y$.

Prove that the sum of two well-orderings again is a well-ordering.

---

**7.4.2.** 
Show that the class of well-orderings is not axiomatizable (as a
class of $L_<$-structures).

---

**7.5.1.**
Given ordinals $\alpha$ and $\beta$, their sum $\alpha + \beta$ is defined to be the uniquely determined ordinai which is isomorphic (as an ordering) to the sum of the ordering $\alpha$ and $\beta$ (in the sense of Exercise 7.4.1).

( a ) Show that the addition on $\omega$ coincides with the usual addition of natural numbers. 

( b ) Prove that the successor of $\alpha$ is the sum of $\alpha$ and 1 (this justifying the notation $\alpha + 1$ for the successor of $\alpha$).

( c ) Verify $1 + \alpha = \alpha$ for all infinite $\alpha \in \mathbf{On}$  (and that addition of ordinals is not commutative).

---

**7.5.2.** Let $X$ be a subset of **On**. Prove that $\bigcup X$ is the supremum of $X$ in $(\mathbf{On}, <)$.

---

**7.5.3.** Show that the complete $L_<$-theory of any infinite ordinai number
has a non-well-founded model, i.e., a model that is not well-ordered.
